# 3.1 Symbol tables

We use the term **symbol table** to describe an abstract mechanism where we save information \(a **value**\) that we can later search for and retrieve by specifying a **key**. Symbol tables are sometimes called **dictionaries** or **indices**.

Definition: A symbol table is a data structure for key-value pairs that supports two operations: **insert** \(put\) a new pair into the table and **search** for \(**get**\) the value associated with a given key.

## Conventions

We adopt the following conventions in all of our implementations:

* Only one value is associated with each key \(no duplicate keys in a table\)
* When a client puts a key-value pair into a table already containing that key \(and an associated value\), the new value replaces the old one.
* Keys must not be null.
* No key can be associated with the value null.
* Keys are iterable.

## Comparable Keys

Several symbol-table implementations take advantage of **order** among the keys that is implied by Comparable to provide efficient implementations of the put\(\) and get\(\) operations. More important, in such implementations, we can think of the symbol table as **keeping the keys in order** and consider a significantly expanded API that defines numerous natural and useful operations involving relative key order.

## Underlying data structure

### 1. Sequential search in an unordered linked list

We _scan through_ the linked list, using equals\(\) to compare the search key with the key in each node in the list. This method is known as **sequential search**: we search by considering the keys in the table one after another.

Analyzing symbol-table algorithms is more complicated than analyzing sorting algorithms because of the difficulty of characterizing the sequence of operations that might be invoked by a given client. For this reason, we pay careful attention to _worst-case performance_. For economy, we use the term **search hit** to refer to a successful search and **search miss** to refer to an unsuccessful search.

It is true that searches for keys that are in the table need not take linear time. It is easy to show that the average number of compares for a **random search hit** is ~ N/2.

### 2. Binary search in an ordered array

The underlying data structure is a pair of parallel arrays, one for the keys and one for the values.

Binary search in an ordered array with N keys uses no more than lgN + 1 compares for a search \(successful or unsuccessful\).

```java
public int rank(Key key) {
    int lo = 0, hi = N-1;
    while (lo <= hi) {
        int mid = lo + (hi - lo) / 2;
        int cmp = key.compareTo(keys[mid]);
        if      (cmp < 0) hi = mid - 1;
        else if (cmp > 0) lo = mid + 1;
        else return mid;
    }
    return lo; 
}
```

