# 1.2 Data Abstraction

A **data type** is a set of values and a set of operations on those values. **Primitive data types**: for example, data type _int_.

**Data abstraction**: the process of defining and using data types.

Programming in Java is largely based on building data types known as **reference types** with the familiar Java **class**. This style of programming is known as **object-oriented programming**, as it revolves around the concept of an **object**, an **entity** that holds a data type value.

An **abstract data type** \(ADT\) is a data type whose representation is hidden from the client. When using an ADT, we focus on the operations specified in the API and pay no attention to the data representation; when implementing an ADT, we focus on the data, then implement operations on that data.

To specify the behavior of an abstract data type, we use an **application programming interface** \(API\), which is a list of constructors and instance methods \(operations\), with an informal description of the effect of each.

The purpose of an API is to separate the client from the implementation: the client should know nothing about the implementation other than information given in the API, and the implementation should not take properties of any particular client into account.

{% hint style="info" %}
A **deprecated** method is a method that is no longer fully supported, but kept in an API to maintain compatibility. Sometimes, entire classes are deprecated.
{% endhint %}

A **reference** is a mechanism for accessing an object. The details of implementing references vary in Java implementations, but it is useful to think of a reference as a memory address.

Each time that a client uses `new()`, the system: 

1. Allocates memory space for the object.
2. Invokes the constructor to initialize its value.
3. Returns a reference to the object

In Java, there is only one way to create a reference \(new\) and only one way to change a reference \(with an assignment statement\). Java references are known as safe pointers, because Java can guarantee that each reference points to an object of the specified type \(and it can determine which objects are not in use, for garbage collection\).

An object is said to be **orphaned** if there is no reference to it, or if it goes out of scope.

In many languages \(such as C and C++\) the programmer is responsible for both allocating and freeing memory. One of the most significant features is garbage collection, to automatically manage memory.

The primary purpose of static methods is to implement functions; the primary purpose of non-static \(instance\) methods is to implement data-type operations.

An assignment statement with a reference type does _NOT_ create a new object, but _a copy of the reference_. If x and y are variables of a primitive type, then the assignment x = y copies the value of y to x. For reference types, the reference is copied \(not the value\).

This situation is known as **aliasing**: both variables refer to the same object. Each time that we use a reference type as a method argument we create an alias, so we must be cautious.

Arrays are objects. As with any other object, when we pass an array to a method or use an array variable on the right hand side of an assignment statement, we are making a copy of the array reference, not a copy of the array.

An array of objects in Java is an array of references to objects, not the objects themselves.

```java
Counter[] rolls = new Counter[10];
for (int i = 1; i <= 10; i++)
  rolls[i] = new Counter(i + "'s");
```

Java’s **String** is an important and useful ADT. A String is an indexed sequence of char values.

Primitive types are closer to the types of data that are supported by computer hardware, so programs that use them usually run faster than programs that use corresponding reference types.

Implementing an abstract data type in Java, putting the code in a file with the same name as the class, followed by the .java extension.

* declare instance variables
* constructor\(s\)
* instance methods
* may also static methods
* In particular, a unit-test client main\(\) is normally useful for testing and debugging.
* _static variable_ \(not associated with any object\)

An **interface** is nothing more than a list of instance methods that each implementing class must contain.

```java
public interface Datable {
  int month();
  int day();
  int year();
}
public class Date implements Datable {
   // implementation code (same as before)
}
```

This arrangement is known as interface inheritance—an implementing class inherits the interface. The mechanism is also known as **subtyping**.

Java also supports another inheritance mechanism known as **subclassing**, to define a subclass that inherits instance methods and instance variables from superclass. The subclass contains more methods than the superclass. Moreover, the subclass can override methods in the superclass.

By convention, every Java type inherits `toString()` from Object, so any client can invoke toString\(\) for any object.

