# 2. Application Layer

The application architecture used in modern network applications: the **client-server** architecture or the **peer-to-peer** \(P2P\) architecture.

In a client-server architecture, there is an always-on host, called the server, which services requests from many other hosts, called clients.

In a P2P architecture, there is minimal \(or no\) reliance on dedicated servers in data centers. We mention that some applications have hybrid architectures, combining both client-server and P2P elements. One of the most compelling features of P2P architectures is their **self-scalability**.

A **process** can be thought of as a program that is running within an end system. Processes on two **different** end systems communicate with each other by exchanging **messages** across the computer network.

For each pair of communicating processes, we typically label one of the two processes as the client and the other process as the server. In P2P file sharing, a process can be both a client and a server.

A process sends messages into, and receives messages from, the network through a software interface called a **socket**. The host is identified by its **IP address**, the **port number** serves to identify process.

What are the services that a transport-layer protocol can offer to applications invoking it? We can broadly classify the possible services along four dimensions: reliable data transfer, throughput, timing, and security. The Internet makes two transport protocols available to applications, UDP and TCP.

_TCP has the client and server exchange transport layer control information with each other before the application-level messages begin to flow. This is called **handshaking**. After the handshaking phase, a TCP connection is said to exist between the sockets of the two processes. The connection is a full-duplex connection in that the two processes can send messages to each other over the connection at the same time. When the application finishes sending messages, it must tear down the connection._

Neither TCP nor UDP provide any encryption. The Internet community has developed an enhancement for TCP, called **Secure Sockets Layer** \(SSL\), provides critical process-to-process security services, including encryption, data integrity, and end-point authentication. SSL is not a third transport protocol, but instead is an enhancement of TCP, with the enhancements being implemented in the application layer. SSL has its own socket API.

In summary, today’s Internet can often provide satisfactory service to reliable data transfer, security, and time-sensitive applications, but it cannot provide any timing or throughput guarantees.



