# 1. Introduction

An **application** usually refers to only the computer software involved, whereas an **information system** may include the software, the database, and even the related manual processes.

Systems Development Life Cycle \(**SDLC**\): the entire process consisting of all the activities required to build, launch, and maintain an information system.

Here are six core processes of the SDLC, even though there is an incredible number of variations of these core processes:

* Identify the problem or need and obtain approval to proceed.
* Plan and monitor the project—what to do, how to do it, and who does it.
* Discover and understand the details of the problem or the need. [**\(System Analysis\)**](2.-systems-analysis-activities.md)
* Design the system components that solve the problem or satisfy the need. **\(System Design\)**
* Build, test, and integrate system components.
* Complete system tests and then deploy the solution.

_There are many ways to implement these six core processes of the SDLC_. An **information systems development process** is the actual approach used to develop a particular information system. One of the newer and more effective ones is called **Agile Development**.

The basic philosophy of Agile Development is that neither team members nor the user completely understands the problems and complexities of a new system, so the project plan and the execution of the project must be responsive to unanticipated issues. It must be agile and flexible. It must have procedures in place to allow for, anticipate, and even embrace changes and new requirements during the development process.

**Iterative development** is an approach to system development in which the system is “grown” in an almost organic fashion. Core components are developed first and then additional components are added. It is called “iterative” because the _six core development processes_ are repeated over and over again to add additional functionality to the overall system.

An **iteration** is like a mini-project in that it has a completed result and a constrained time frame. Often, it will last two to four weeks. During one iteration, often all the core development processes are involved, so the result is a part of the working system, even though it may only have a portion of the functionality that is ultimately required.

