# 2. Systems Analysis Activities

The term **technology architecture** describes the set of computing hardware, network hardware and topology, and system software— such as operating and database management systems—employed by an organization.

The term **application architecture** describes how software resources are organized and constructed to implement an organization’s information systems.

To fully understand system analysis activities, you need to answer a fundamental question: What are requirements?

## Requirements

**System requirements** are all the activities the new system must perform or support and the constraints that the new system must meet. Generally, analysts divide system requirements into two categories: **functional** and **nonfunctional** requirements.

* Functional requirements are the activities that the system must perform. \(Business rules and processes\)
* Nonfunctional requirements are characteristics of the system other than those activities it must perform or support.

It is not always easy to distinguish functional from nonfunctional requirements. One way to do so is to use a framework for identifying and classifying requirements. There have been many such frameworks developed over time; the most widely used today is called **FURPS+**.

* F: functional requirements
* U: usability
* R: reliability
* P: performance
* S: security

+ is an extension of FURPS that adds additional categories, including design constraints as well as implementation, interface, physical, and supportability requirements.

As with any set of requirements categories, FURPS+ has some gray areas and some overlaps among its categories. The answers to such questions are not important. What is important is that all requirements be identified and precisely stated early in the development process and that inconsistencies or trade-offs among them be resolved.

## Models

Analysts build models to describe system requirements and use those models to communicate with users and designers. As with any development activity, an iterative approach is used for creating models. The first draft of a model has some but not all details worked out. The next iteration might fill in more details or correct previous misconceptions.

Analysis and design models can be grouped into three generic types:

* Textual models: text-based system models such as memos, reports, narratives, and event lists. Narrative description is often the best way to initially record information gathered verbally from stakeholders, such as during an interview. In many cases, narratives and other textual models are later converted into a graphical format.
* Graphical models: use pictures and other graphical elements. Many graphical models used in system development are drawn according to the notation specified by the Unified Modeling Language \(**UML**\).
* Mathematical models

## Activities

### Gather detailed information



Gather detailed information: from users and documents

Define requirements

Prioritize requirements

Develop user-interface dialogs 

Evaluate requirements with users

