# 5. Trends and Future

The approach presented in this textbook isn’t the only method for developing systems. As you move forward with your career in information systems, you will find that the industry is wide and varied. Many organizations have a mix of older, well-established methods for some projects and newer techniques and methods for other projects.

Agile philosophy only proposes principles, three methodologies that incorporate Agile principles but are also complete methodologies, with specific techniques and practices, are the **Unified Process** \(UP\), **Scrum**, and **Extreme Programming** \(XP\), among the most popular approaches.

These three methodologies aren’t always found in their purest forms. Frequently, organizations either mix and match techniques from the three or only adopt a specific set of practices.

The UP defines a complete methodology that uses **UML** for system models. UP divides a project into four major phases. A phase in the UP can be thought of as a goal or major emphasis for a particular portion of the project. The four phases of the UP life cycle are: inception, elaboration, construction, and transition.

XP is really an attempt to take the **best practices** of software development and extend them “to the extreme.” Extreme programming has these characteristics: \(1\) Takes proven industry best practices and focuses on them intensely. \(2\) Combines those best practices \(in their most intense forms\) in a new way to produce a result that is greater than the sum of the parts.

There are three important Scrum areas to understand: the philosophy, the organization, and the practices.

* philosophy:  Scrum is responsive to a highly changing, dynamic environment in which users might not know exactly what is needed and might also change priorities frequently. The basic control mechanism for a Scrum project is a list of all the things the system should include and address, called the **product backlog**.
* organization: **product owner**, the **Scrum master**, and the Scrum **team** or teams.
* practices: The Scrum practices are the mechanics of how a project progresses. The basic work process is called a **sprint**, and all other practices are focused on supporting a sprint.

