# 2. Structured Query Language

SQL is not a complete programming language, like Java or C\#. Instead, it is called a **data sublanguage**.

SQL statements are commonly divided into categories, five of which are of interest to us here:

* Data definition language \(DDL\): Used for creating tables, relationships and other database structures.
* Data manipulation language \(DML\): Used for querying, inserting, modifying, and deleting data.
* SQL/Persistent stored modules \(SQL/PSM\): Extend SQL by adding programming capabilities
* Transaction control language \(TCL\): Used to mark transaction boundaries and control transaction behavior.
* Data control language \(DCL\): Used to grant database permissions to users and groups

This chapter considers only **DML** statements for querying data. The basic form of SQL queries uses the SQL **SELECT/FROM/WHERE** framework.

When SQL statements are executed, the statements transform tables. SQL statements start with a table, process that table in some way, and then place the results in another table structure. Even if the result of the processing is just a single number, that number is considered to be a table with one row and one column. Some SQL statements process multiple tables. Regardless of the number of input tables, though, **the result of every SQL statement is a single table**.

SQL query statement examples:

```sql
SELECT * FROM tickets WHERE created_on > '2011-08-26';
SELECT * FROM order ORDER BY orderNumber, price DESC;
SELECT * FROM SKU_DATA WHERE Buyer NOT IN (‘Nancy Meyers’, ‘Cindy Lo’);
SELECT * FROM order WHERE price BETWEEN 100 AND 200;
SELECT * FROM customer WHERE name LIKE ‘%TENT%’;
SELECT SUM(price) AS OrderItemSUM, AVG(price) AS OrderItemAvg FROM ORDER_ITEM;
SELECT TOP 5 * FROM customer ORDER BY cost;
```

SQL provides two different techniques for querying data from multiple tables: **subquery** and **join**.

