# 5. ER Relationship Model

In this chapter and the next, we consider the design of databases that arise from the development of new information systems.

A data model is a plan, or blueprint, for a database design. Data modeling occurs in the requirements analysis step of the SDLC.

The **entity-relationship** model is the most prominent data model in use today.

An **entity** is a single thing that the user wants to track, like employee, customer, etc.

Entities of a given type are grouped into an **entity class**.

An **entity instance** of an entity class is the occurrence of a particular entity.

Entities have **attributes** that describe their characteristics.

Entity instances have **identifiers**, which are attributes that name, or identify, entityinstances. Identifiers that consist of two or more attributes are called **composite identifiers**.

Entities can be associated with one another in **relationships**.

**Relationship classes** are associations among entity classes, and **relationship instances** are associations among entity instances.

In the ER model, relationships are classified by their **cardinality**, a word that means “count.” The **maximum cardinality** is the maximum number of entity instances that can participate in a relationship instance. The **minimum cardinality** is the minimum number of entity instances that must participate in a relationship instance.

3 basic maximum cardinalities:

* one-to-one \(1:1\) relationship
* one-to-many  \(  1:N\) relationship \(the terms parent and child are sometimes   used.\)
* many-to-many \(N:M\) relationship

These relationships are sometimes called **HAS-A** relationships.This term is used because each entity instance has a relationship to a second entity instance.

Generally, minimums are stated as either zero or one. If zero, then participation in the relationship is **optional**, represented by a small cycle. If one, then at least one entity instance must participate in the relationship, which is called **mandatory** participation, represented by a hash mark. Then we have 3 basic minimum cardinalities: 

* mandatory-to-mandatory \(M-M\) relationship
* optional-to-optional \(O-O\) relationship
* optional-to-mandatory \(O-M\) relationship

## E-R Diagrams Using the IE Crow’s Foot Model

At least three different versions of the E-R model are in use today. One of them, uses crow’s feet to show the many side of a relationship, and it is called the **IE Crow’s Foot** model. It is easy to understand, and we will use it throughout this text. Other models involved **IDEF1X** and **UML**.





