# 3.2 Binary Search Tree

We will examine a symbol-table implementation that combines the flexibility of insertion in a linked list with the efficiency of search in an ordered array.

In a binary tree, we have the restriction that every node is pointed to by just one other node, which is called its **parent** \(except for one node, the **root**, which has no nodes pointing to it\), and that each node has exactly two links, that point to nodes called its **left child** and **right child**, respectively. Each node also has a key and a value.

Although links point to nodes, we can view **each link as pointing to a binary tree**, the **subtree**, whose root is the referenced node.

A **binary search tree** \(BST\) is a binary tree where each node has a **Comparable** key \(and an associated value\) and satisfies the restriction that the key in any node is larger than the keys in all nodes in that node’s left subtree and smaller than the keys in all nodes in that node’s right subtree.

## Basic implementation

```java
private class Node {
    private Key key;           // sorted by key
    private Value val;         // associated data
    private Node left, right;  // left and right subtrees
    private int size;          // number of nodes in subtree
}
```

for every node x in the tree: size\(x\) returns number of key-value pairs in BST rooted at x

```java
size(x) = size(x.left) + size(x.right) + 1
```

A BST represents a set of keys \(and associated values\), and there are many **different** BSTs that represent the same set.

## Operations

* Search: the search defines a **path** through the tree. For a search hit, the path terminates at the node containing the key. For a search miss, the path terminates at a null link.
* Insert: Indeed, a search for a key not in the tree ends at a null link, and all that we need to do is replace that link with a new node containing the key.
* Minimum and maximum: move left/right until finding a null link.
* Floor and ceiling
* Selection: we seek the key of rank k \(the key such that precisely k other keys in the BST are smaller\), If the number of keys t in the left subtree is larger than k, we look \(recursively\) for the key of rank k in the left subtree; etc.
* Rank: if the given key is equal to the key at the root, we return the number of keys t in the left subtree; etc.
* **Delete: the most difficult part!**
* Range queries: returns the keys in a given range

### Traversal: depth-first

inorder traversal: printing all the keys in order**,** print all the keys in the left subtree, then print the key at the root, then print all the keys in the right subtree.

```java
private void print(Node x) {
     if (x == null) return;
     print(x.left);
     StdOut.println(x.key);
     print(x.right);
}
```

preorder traversal: print root, print left, print right

postorder traversal: print left, print right, print root

### Traversal: breadth-first

level-order traversal: prints the keys in level order - in order of their distance from the root, with nodes on each level in order from left to right; Hint: use a queue

```java
public void levelOrder(Node node) {  
    if (node == null) return; //boundary 
    LinkedList<Node> queue = new LinkedList<>();
    queue.offer(node);  
    while (!queue.isEmpty()) {  
        Node n = queue.poll();  
        System.out.print(n.key);  
        if (n.left != null) queue.offer(n.left);  
        if (n.right != null) queue.offer(n.right);  
    }  
}  
```

### Delete

As a warmup, consider **deleteMin\(\)**: we go left until finding a Node that has a null left link and then replace the link to that node by its right link. \(p421\)

```java
private Node deleteMin(Node x) {
    if (x.left == null) return x.right;
    x.left = deleteMin(x.left);
    x.size = size(x.left) + size(x.right) + 1;
    return x;
}
```

After the deletion, set the appropriate link in the parent and update the counts in all nodes in the path to the root.

To delete a node x that _has two children_ is to replace it with its **successor**. Because x has a right child, its successor is the node with the smallest key in its right subtree. \(p423\)

```java
private Node delete(Node x, Key key) {
    if (x == null) return null;
    int cmp = key.compareTo(x.key);
    if      (cmp < 0) x.left  = delete(x.left,  key);
    else if (cmp > 0) x.right = delete(x.right, key);
    else { 
        if (x.right == null) return x.left;
        if (x.left  == null) return x.right;
        Node t = x;
        x = min(t.right);
        x.right = deleteMin(t.right);
        x.left = t.left;
    } 
    x.size = size(x.left) + size(x.right) + 1;
    return x;
} 
```

## Analysis

The **tree height**: the maximum depth of any node in the tree.

Good performance of the basic BST implementation is dependent on the keys being sufficiently similar to **random** keys that the tree is not likely to contain many long paths. 



