# 3.4 Hash Tables

If keys are small integers, we can use an array to implement an unordered symbol table, by interpreting the key as an array index, ready for immediate access. In this section, we consider **hashing**, an extension of this simple method that handles more complicated types of keys.

Search algorithms that use hashing consist of two separate parts. The first part is to compute a **hash function** that transforms the search key into an array index. Ideally, different keys would map to different indices. This ideal is generally beyond our reach, so we have to face the possibility that two or more different keys may hash to the same array index. Thus, the second part of a hashing search is a **collision-resolution** process: **separate chaining**\(分离链接\) and **linear probing**\(线性探测\).

Hashing is a classic example of a **time-space tradeoff**. If there were no memory limitation, then we could do any search with only one memory access by simply using the key as an index in a \(potentially huge\) array. With hashing, you can implement search and insert for symbol tables that require **constant** time per operation in typical applications.

## Hash functions

If we have an array that can hold M key-value pairs, then we need a hash function that can transform any given key into an index into that array: an integer in the range \[0, M–1\].

To hash positive integers: **modular hashing**. Choose the array size M to be **prime** and, for any positive integer key k, compute the remainder when dividing k by M.

Java helps us address the basic problem that every type of data needs a hash function by ensuring that every data type inherits a method called `hashCode()` that returns a 32-bit integer.

The implementation of hashCode for a data type must be consistent with equals. That is, if `a.equals(b)` is true, then `a.hashCode()` must have the same numerical value as `b.hashCode()`.

If the `hashCode()` values are the same, the objects **may or may not** be equal, and we must use `equals()` to decide which condition holds. This convention is a basic requirement for clients to be able to use `hashCode()` for symbol tables. 

Note that it implies that you **must** **override both** `hashCode()` and `equals()` if you need to hash with a user-defined type. The default implementation returns the **machine address** of the key object, which is seldom what you want. Java provides `hashCode()` implementations that override the defaults for many common types \(including String, Integer, Double, File, and URL\).

