# 1. Fundamentals

## Hello World

```java
/**
 * The HelloWorldApp class implements an application that
 * simply displays "Hello World!" to the standard output.
 */
class HelloWorldApp {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        System.out.println("Hello World!"); // Display the string.
    }
}
```

In the Java programming language, every application must contain a main method whose signature is:

```java
public static void main(String[] args)
```

It's the **entry point** for your application and will subsequently invoke all the other methods required by your program. Each string in the array is called a **command-line argument**.

## Notes

**Assertion** is a statement in java. It can be used to test your assumptions about the program. While executing assertion, it is believed to be true. If it fails, JVM will throw an error named AssertionError. It is mainly used for testing purpose.

We can convert double to int in java using **typecasting**.

++x increments the value of x and then returns x; x++ returns the value of x and then increments

An **immutable** data type, such as Date, has the property that the value of an object never changes once constructed. Java’s language support for helping to enforce immutability is the **final** modifier.

**Integer literals** can be written as:

* A decimal number, with no prefix
* A binary number, with a 0b prefix
* An octal number, with a 0o prefix
* A hexadecimal number, with a 0x prefix

## Bitwise and Bit Shift Operators

The operators discussed in this section are **less commonly used**. Therefore, their coverage is brief; the intent is to simply make you aware that these operators exist.

bitwise operator:

```c
A = 60, B = 13;
// bit pattern
A = 0011 1100
B = 0000 1101
A & B = 0000 1100
A | B = 0011 1101
A ^ B = 0011 0001
~A = 1100 0011
```

signed left shift operator "&lt;&lt;" shifts a bit pattern to the left; signed right shift operator "&gt;&gt;" shifts a bit pattern to the right.

## Enum

An enum type is a special data type that enables for a variable to be a set of predefined **constants**. Because they are constants, the names of an enum type's fields are in **uppercase** letters.

The enum declaration defines a **class** \(called an enum type\). All enums implicitly extend **java.lang.Enum**.

