# 1. Fundamentals

## Propositional Logic

Our discussion begins with an introduction to the basic building blocks of logic—**propositions**. A proposition 命题 is a declarative sentence \(that is, a sentence that declares a fact\) that is either true or false, but not both.

The **truth value** of a proposition is true, denoted by T, if it is a true proposition, and the truth value of a proposition is false, denoted by F, if it is a false proposition.

We use letters to denote **propositional variables** such as _p, q, r, s_, . . . . New propositions, called **compound propositions**, are formed from existing propositions using logical operators:

* The _negation_ of p, denoted by¬p.
* The _conjunction_ of p and q, denoted by p ∧ q.
* The _disjunction_ of p and q, denoted by p ∨ q. \(_inclusive or_\)
* The _exclusive or_ of p and q, denoted by p ⊕ q, is the proposition that is true when exactly one of p and q is true and is false otherwise.

The **conditional statement** p → q is the proposition “if p, then q.” p is called the _hypothesis_ and q is called the _conclusion_. It is false when p is true and q is false, and true otherwise.

When p is false, q may be either true or false, because the statement says nothing about the truth value of q. There are ways to express this statement:

* p is sufficient for q, q is necessary for p
* “p only if q”, p cannot be true when q is not true
* “q unless ¬p“

We can form some new conditional statements starting with a conditional statement p → q.

* q → p is called the _converse_ 逆命题 of p → q
* ¬q →¬p is called the _contrapositive_ 逆否命题 of p → q
* ¬p →¬q is called the _inverse_ 反命题 of p → q

When two compound propositions always have the same truth value we call them **equivalent**, so that a conditional statement and its contrapositive are equivalent. The converse and the inverse of a conditional statement are also equivalent.

The **biconditional statement** p ↔ q is the proposition “p if and only if q.”  It's true when p and q have the same truth values, and is false otherwise.

## Logical Equivalences

A compound proposition that is always true is called a _tautology 永真式_. A compound proposition that is always false is called a _contradiction 矛盾式_.

Compound propositions that have the same truth values in all possible cases are called **logically equivalent**.

De Morgan laws:

* ¬\(p ∨ q\) and ¬p ∧¬q are logically equivalent.
* ¬\(p ∧ q\) and ¬p ∨¬q are logically equivalent.

## Predicates and Quantifiers

In this section we will introduce a more powerful type of logic called **predicate logic**.

We can denote the statement “x is greater than 3” by **P\(x\)**, where P denotes the **predicate** “is greater than 3” and x is the **variable**. Once a value has been assigned to the variable x, the statement P\(x\) becomes a proposition and has a truth value. In this case, P\(3\) is false and P\(4\) is true.

Predicates are also used to establish the correctness of computer programs, that is, to show that computer programs always produce the desired output when given valid input. \(Note that unless the correctness of a computer program is established, no amount of testing can show that it produces the desired output for all input values, unless every input value is tested.\) The statements that describe valid input are known as **preconditions** and the conditions that the output should satisfy when the program has run are known as **postconditions**.

**Quantification** expresses the extent to which a predicate is true over a range of elements. 

The **universal quantification** of P\(x\) for a particular **domain** is the proposition that asserts that P\(x\) is true for all values of x in this domain, denoted by **∀xP\(x\)**. Note that a single _counterexample_ is all we need to establish that ∀xP\(x\) is false.

The **existential quantification** of P\(x\) is the proposition “there exists an element x in the domain such that P\(x\).”, denoted by **∃xP\(x\)**.

The rules for negations for quantifiers are called De Morgan’s laws for quantifiers.

* ¬∀xP\(x\) is logically equivalent with ∃x ¬P\(x\)
* ¬∃xQ\(x\) is logically equivalent with ∀x ¬Q\(x\)

## Proofs

Formally, a **theorem** 定理 is a statement that can be shown to be true. We demonstrate that a theorem is true with a **proof**. **Axioms** 公理 are statements we assume to be true. A **conjecture** 猜想 is a statement that is being proposed to be a true statement.



