# 4. Number Theory and Cryptography

## Modular

The part of mathematics devoted to the study of the set of integers and their properties is known as number theory 数论.

In the equality given in the division algorithm, d is called the **divisor**, a is called the **dividend**, q is called the **quotient**, and r is called the **remainder**. This notation is used to express the quotient and remainder: q = a **div** d, r = a **mod** d.

If a and b are integers and m is a positive integer, then **a is congruent to b modulo m** if m divides a − b, denoted by **a ≡ b \(mod m\)**.

> 17 is congruent to 5 mod 6 because 6 divides 17 - 5 = 12, 17 ≡ 5 \(mod 6\), can be rewritten as 17 = 6t + 5.

a ≡ b \(mod m\) if and only if _a mod m = b mod m_.

## Primes

A **prime** 素数 is an integer greater than 1 that is divisible by no positive integers other than 1 and itself. A positive integer that is greater than 1 and is not prime is called **composite**.

Primes have become essential in modern cryptographic systems. The length of time required to factor large integers into their prime factors is the basis for the strength of some important modern cryptographic systems.

{% hint style="info" %}
The fundamental theorem of arithmetic: Every integer greater than 1 can be written uniquely as a prime or as the product of two or more primes where the prime factors are written in order of nondecreasing size.
{% endhint %}

{% hint style="info" %}
THEOREM: If n is a composite integer, then n has a prime divisor less than or equal to $$\sqrt{n}$$ . \(This leads to the brute-force algorithm known as **trial division**.\)
{% endhint %}

The **sieve of Eratosthenes** is used to find all primes not exceeding a specified positive integer.

The conjecture that every even integer n, n &gt; 2, is the sum of two primes is now called **Goldbach’s conjecture**.

The largest integer that divides both of two integers is called the **greatest common divisor** of these integers, denoted by _gcd\(a, b\)_.

**Prime factorizations** can also be used to find the **least common multiple** of two integers.

We will develop an important algorithm for computing greatest common divisors, called the **Euclidean algorithm**. It is based on the following result:

{% hint style="info" %}
LEMMA: Let a = bq + r, where a, b, q, and r are integers. Then gcd\(a, b\) = gcd\(b, r\).
{% endhint %}

The time complexity of the Euclidean algorithm is O\(log b\).

## Congruences

Solving **linear congruences** 线性同余, which have the form **ax ≡ b \(mod m\)**, is an essential task in the study of number theory and its applications, just as solving linear equations plays an important role in calculus and linear algebra.

Solving linear congruences is an essential task in the study of number theory and its applications, just as solving linear equations plays an important role in calculus and linear algebra.

### Hashing Function

The central computer at an insurance company maintains records for each of its customers. Records are identified using a key, which uniquely identifies each customer’s records. A **hashing function** _h_ assigns memory location _h\(k\)_ to the record that has _k_ as its key.

One of the most common is the function _h\(k\) = k mod m_.

Because a hashing function is not one-to-one \(because there are more possible keys than memory locations\), more than one file may be assigned to a memory location. When this happens, we say that a **collision** occurs.

One way to resolve a collision is to assign the first free location following the occupied memory location assigned by the hashing function, called **linear probing function**.

### Pseudorandom Numbers

Randomly chosen numbers are often needed for computer simulations. Because numbers generated by systematic methods are not truly random, they are called **pseudorandom numbers**.

We generate a sequence of pseudorandom numbers $$\{x_n\}$$ , with 0 ≤ $$x_n$$ &lt; m for all n, by successively using the recursively defined function $$x_{n+1} = (ax_n + c)\ mod\ m$$ .

### Check Digits

Congruences are used to check for errors in digit strings.

Digital information is represented by bit string, split into blocks of a specified size. Before each block is stored or transmitted, an extra bit, called a parity check bit 奇偶校验位, can be appended to each block.

Examples 5 and 6 show how check bits are computed for codes that identify products \(Universal Product Codes, UPC\) and books \(International Standard Book Numbers. ISBN\).

## Cryptography

One of the earliest known uses of cryptography was by Julius Caesar. He made messages secret by shifting each letter three letters forward in the alphabet.

Shift ciphers 移位密码 and affine ciphers 仿射密码 proceed by replacing each letter of the alphabet by another letter in the alphabet. Because of this, these ciphers are called character or monoalphabetic ciphers.

We can make it harder to attack ciphertext by replacing blocks of letters with other blocks of letters, called **block ciphers**.

All classical ciphers are examples of **private key cryptosystems**. In the 1970s cryptologists introduced the concept of **public key cryptosystems**. The RSA method is now widely used. For example, a public key cryptosystem, such as RSA, can be used to distribute private keys to pairs of individuals when they wish to communicate. These people then use a private key system for encryption and decryption of messages.



