# 5. Induction and Recursion

## Mathematical Induction

In general, mathematical induction can be used to prove statements that assert that P\(n\) is true for _all positive integers_ n, where P\(n\) is a propositional function.

A proof by mathematical induction has two parts, a basis step, where we show that P\(1\) is true, and an inductive step, where we show that for all positive integers k, if P\(k\) is true, then P\(k + 1\) is true.

> In fact, mathematical induction, strong induction, and well-ordering are all equivalent principles.

## Recursion

Sometimes it is difficult to define an object explicitly. However, it may be easy to define this object in terms of itself. This process is called **recursion**.

When we define a set recursively, we specify some initial elements in a **basis step** and provide a rule for constructing new elements from those we already have in the **recursive step**.

An algorithm is called **recursive** if it solves a problem by reducing it to an instance of the same problem with smaller input.

```java
int fibonacci(int n) {
    if (n == 0) return 0;
    if (n == 1) return 1;
    return fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2);
}
```

Instead of successively reducing the computation to the evaluation of the function at smaller integers, we can start with the value of the function at one or more integers, the base cases, and successively apply the recursive definition to find the values of the function at successive larger integers. Such a procedure is called **iterative**.

```java
int fibonacci(int n) {
    if (n == 0) return 0;
    int x = 0, y = 0;
    for (int i = 1; i < n; i++) {
        int z = x + y;
        x = y;
        y = z;
    }
    return y;
}
```

We have shown that a recursive algorithm may require far more computation than an iterative one when a recursively defined function is evaluated. It is sometimes preferable to use a recursive procedure even if it is less efficient than the iterative procedure. In particular, this is true when the recursive approach is easily implemented and the iterative approach is not.



