# 4.2 Directed Graph

In directed graphs, edges are one-way: the pair of vertices that defines each edge is an ordered pair that specifies a one-way adjacency. Many applications \(for example, graphs that represent the web, scheduling constraints, or telephone calls\) are naturally expressed in terms of directed graphs.

Definition. A **directed graph** \(or digraph\) is a set of vertices and a collection of directed edges. Each directed edge connects an ordered pair of vertices.

We say that a directed edge points from the first vertex in the pair and points to the second vertex in the pair. The **outdegree** 出度 of a vertex in a digraph is the number of edges going from it; the **indegree** 入度 of a vertex is the number of edges going to it. The first vertex in a directed edge is called its head; the second vertex is called its tail. We use the notation v-&gt;w to refer to an edge that points from v to w in a digraph.

Definition. A **directed path** in a digraph is a sequence of vertices in which there is a \(directed\) edge pointing from each vertex in the sequence to its successor in the sequence. A **directed cycle** is a directed path with at least one edge whose first and last vertices are the same. A simple cycle is a cycle with no repeated edges or vertices \(except the requisite repetition of the first and last vertices\).（本书只讨论 simple cycle）The length of a path or a cycle is its number of edges.

注意这两者的区别：distinction between reachability in digraphs and connectivity in undirected graphs.

```java
public class Digraph {
     private final int V;
     private int E;
     private Bag<Integer>[] adj;
     
     public Digraph(int V) {
          this.V = V;
          this.E = 0;
          adj = (Bag<Integer>[]) new Bag[V];
          for (int v = 0; v < V; v++) {
               adj[v] = new Bag<Integer>();
          }
     }
     
     public int V()  {  return V;  }
     public int E()  {  return E;  }
     
     public void addEdge(int v, int w) {
          adj[v].add(w);
          E++;
     }
     
     public Iterable<Integer> adj(int v)
     {  return adj[v];  }
     
     public Digraph reverse() {
          Digraph R = new Digraph(V);
          for (int v = 0; v < V; v++)
               for (int w : adj(v))
                    R.addEdge(w, v);
          return R;
     }
}
```

## Depth First Search

Single-source reachability. Given a digraph and a source vertex s, support queries of the form Is there a directed path from s to a given target vertex v?

Multiple-source reachability. Given a digraph and a set of source vertices, support queries of the form Is there a directed path from any vertex in the set to a given target vertex v? This problem arises in the solution of a classic string-processing problem that we consider in Section 5.4.

```java
public class DirectedDFS {
    private boolean[] marked;
    public DirectedDFS(Digraph G, int s) {
        marked = new boolean[G.V()];
        dfs(G, s);
    }
    
    public DirectedDFS(Digraph G, Iterable<Integer> sources) {
        marked = new boolean[G.V()];
        for (int s : sources)
           if (!marked[s]) dfs(G, s);
    }
    
    private void dfs(Digraph G, int v) {
        marked[v] = true;
        for (int w : G.adj(v))
           if (!marked[w]) dfs(G, w);
    }
}
```



