# 3. Transport Layer

A transport-layer protocol provides for **logical communication** between application processes running on different hosts. The transport layer converts the application-layer messages it receives from a sending application process into transport-layer packets, known as transport-layer **segments**. Application processes use the logical communication provided by the transport layer to send messages to each other, free from the worry of the details of the physical infrastructure used to carry these messages.

Transport-layer protocols are implemented in the end systems but not in network routers. Whereas a transport-layer protocol provides logical communication between **processes** running on different hosts, a network-layer protocol provides logical communication between **hosts**. This distinction is subtle but important: 

* application messages = 快递
* processes = 收件人
* hosts = 收件地址（房屋）
* transport-layer protocol = 快递员
* network-layer protocol = 快递服务

Recall that the Internet, and more generally a **TCP/IP** network, makes two distinct transport-layer protocols: TCP \(Transmission Control Protocol\) and UDP \(User Datagram Protocol\).

Before introduce UDP and TCP, it will be useful to say a few words about the network layer. The Internet’s network-layer protocol has a name—IP, for **Internet Protocol**. The IP service model is a **best-effort** delivery service.

Extending host-to-host delivery to process-to-process delivery is called transport-layer **multiplexing** and **demultiplexing**, by using source and destination port-number fields in a transport-layer segment. Each port number is a 16-bit number, ranging from 0 to 65535. The port numbers ranging from 0 to 1023 are called well-known port numbers and are restricted for use by well-known application protocols.

UDP uses **connectionless** demultiplexing: IP datagrams with same destination port number, but different source IP addresses and/or source port numbers will be directed to same socket at destination.

TCP uses **connection-oriented** demultiplexing: each socket identified by its own 4-tuple \(source IP address, source port number, dest IP address, dest port number\)One subtle difference between a TCP socket and a UDP socket is that a TCP socket is identified by a four-tuple: \(source IP address, source port number, destination IP address, destination port number\). The server host may support many simultaneous TCP connection sockets, with each socket attached to a process, and with each socket identified by its own four-tuple. When a TCP segment arrives at the host, all four fields are used to direct \(demultiplex\) the segment to the appropriate socket.

In fact, today’s high-performing Web servers often use only one process, and create a new **thread** with a new connection socket for each new client connection. For such a server, at any given time there may be many connection sockets \(with different identifiers\) attached to the same process.

If the client and server are using persistent HTTP, then throughout the duration of the persistent connection the client and server exchange HTTP messages via the same server socket.

## UDP

UDP does just about as little as a transport protocol can do. Aside from the multiplexing/demultiplexing function and some light error checking, it adds nothing to IP.

UDP has no congestion control. If everyone were to start streaming high-bitrate video without using any congestion control, there would be so much packet overflow at routers that very few UDP packets would successfully traverse the source-to-destination path. Moreover, the high loss rates induced by the uncontrolled UDP senders would cause the TCP senders \(which, as we’ll see, do decrease their sending rates in the face of congestion\) to dramatically decrease their rates. Some organizations blocking UDP traffic for security reasons.

Nevertheless, many important applications run over UDP rather than TCP.

## TCP





